---
layout: post
title: Some interesting books I've read recently
date: 2022-07-04
categories: books
---

# Interesting Books

This is a short post to let you know about some interesting books I've recently finished that you might find 
interesting.

## The Atlas of Unusual Borders

Or to give it its full title *The Atlas of Unusual Borders: Discover intriguing boundaries, territories and 
geographical curiosities* by Zoran Nikolic. I blame Barry Rowlingson who threw a link to it into a twitter 
discussion on borders, so I had to buy it. And, to be honest I'm very happy I did, it is an atlas of 
"interesting" border enclaves and other geographic oddities. So if like me you've ever wondered why Belgium 
has some many enclaves (and [exclaves](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enclave_and_exclave), and 
counter-enclaves) (or you just wondered what those are) this is the book that you **need** in your library. It 
also answers questions such as which capital city is a ghost town too? Plymouth, Montserrat to save you trying 
to look it up. This is a fascinating book with nearly every page leading to a "I didn't know that". My only 
minor quibble with it is the colour scheme of the maps, I really struggle with maps where the land is blue and 
the sea is grey, and with the highlights as yellow it is probably not a book for anyone with blue/yellow 
colour blindness.

## git commit murder and git sync murder

This pair of books by  Michael Warren Lucas, are murder mysteries set at technical conferences. If you have 
ever been to an open source conference (such as [FOSS4G](http://foss4g.org/)) then you will recognise many of 
the characters in these books. In the first book set at the (fictional) BSDNorth conference our hero Dale 
Whitehead sets out to give a technical talk but is sidetracked by the death of his room mate (and the weight 
of his laptop bag, which he seems to never get around to clearing out). I found this a very believable account 
of free software development, technical conferences and Unix hackers, though while I may have considered 
killing a user I've never actually done it!

*git sync murder* sees Dale forced to attend another conference despite his promise to himself to never leave 
his apartment ever again. Once again, things quickly spin out of his control and that laptop bag is no lighter 
than last time. I loved both these books and can thoroughly recommend them if you are at all into whodunits.

Finally, if you enjoy conferences/convention books then I'll throw in Charlie Stross' [*Dechlorinating the 
Moderator*](https://epdf.tips/charles-stross-dechlorinating-the-moderator.html) which I read in his collected 
Toast volume which reports from a futuristic 2018 Particulate 7: HiNRG & B-OND conference, for a fun short 
story. 
